[     Drug Pricing Dishonesty Carries Its Own Costs]
Phase II, which could start as early as January 2017, is potentially even scarier. This phase will test something known as value-based purchasing arrangements – arrangements that link payment for medications to  outcomes and cost-effectiveness rather than just the quantity of treatments.
Although CMS is uncertain which specific arrangements it will test, and there are some good ideas in the potential list, some of the possibilities could produce harmful consequences. Namely, value-based purchasing arrangements that set a standard payment rate for a group of similar drug products, such as reference pricing, will effectively act like a price control, because the only way certain drugs will be available is if drug companies agree to offer them at that set rate. And as I explain in a recent study, price controls – whether direct or indirect – are a bad idea for prescription drugs for several reasons.
First, if the set payment rate is calculated as some percentage off current prices – one approach CMS proposes – then drug companies will have an incentive to raise prices. In fact, evidence shows that existing price controls have contributed to higher launch prices of drugs as drug companies act to offset the required percentage rebate.
[What Doctors Can Learn From Small Farming]
Second, because the new proposals will only apply to drugs sold under the Medicare Part B program, drug companies have the incentive to charge even higher prices to other noncovered  outside of Medicare to offset the discounts. Indeed, numerous studies and government analyses have concluded that required discounts under Medicaid and Medicare have resulted in increased prices for other consumers as manufacturers seek to offset revenue lost under price controls.

Third, price controls contribute to drug shortages   At a below-market price, the demand for drugs exceeds the amount of drugs that manufacturers are willing or able to sell. Indirect price controls, such as reference pricing, that effectively require drug companies to sell at lower prices could similarly result in drug shortages.

Lastly, price controls hinder innovation in the pharmaceutical industry. On average, brand drug companies will spend $2.6 billion to bring each new drug to market with FDA approval. They must offset these significant costs with revenues earned during the patent period; within 3 months after patent expiry, generic competitors will have al y captured over 70 percent of the brand drugs' market share and significantly eroded their profits. Requiring drug companies to offer drugs under patent at significantly lower prices increases the risk that drug companies will not earn the profits they need to justify their development costs. This will result in pharmaceutical companies spending less money on research and development and developing fewer new lifesaving drugs.

[Wall Street Demands Are Driving Up Drug Prices]
If the CMS proposals are implemented, the unintended consequences of price controls would become reality – higher prices for  outside of Medicare and a potentially devastating squeeze on the research and development pipeline.
While the proposed rule was no doubt intended to help, policymakers should steer clear of any reform that could act as a direct or indirect price control. Failure to do so could ultimately harm the very  the rule is designed to benefit. A far better way to control drug spending would be to seek methods that enhance competition among medications – competition lowers drug prices and spurs innovation as drug suppliers compete for valuable market share.
Jason first became addicted to prescription pills when he was a teen, after a doctor prescribed a powerful drug to his  headaches.
It took care of the , but I found myself taking [the painkillers] even when I didn't have the , because I just enjoyed that euphoric numbness," he says. He’s asked us not to use his last name.
Before too long, he says he was popping 45 prescription pills a day, mostly hydrocodone, a strong painkiller. But he also abused tranquilizers like alprazolam and diazepam.
He says his addiction became so overwhelming that he hit rock bottom   He stole pain medication from his mother, who was dying of bone cancer. "She would cry at me because she was in so much pain, but I had taken her medication,” he says.
That’s what it took for Jason to get help. He’s been in recovery for 11 years.
Commonly Abused Drugs
His path to addiction isn’t unusual. It often starts with a medication prescribed for a medical reason.

"The person had an injury or operation, they got a prescription,” says Peter R. Martin, MD, professor of psychiatry and pharmacology at Vanderbilt University. “They basically liked it and kept on doing it.”

That leads them to become dependent on the drug, needing more and more to get the same effect. “The next step is to go from doctor to doctor to try to get medicine when the original doctor says no,” Martin says.

Jason recalls visiting several doctors in one day to get enough pills to fuel his habit -- a practice called "doctor shopping."



Drug Abuse

Drug abuse isn't just about street drugs. Besides marijuana, legal medicines are the most commonly abused drugs in the U.S. Over-the-counter and prescription drugs can help and heal us. But some can be addictive and dangerous if they’re used the wrong way.
Keep your family safe. Use this guide to help you spot some commonly misused medicines. Because drugs come in many forms, not all pills and tablets are shown. Drug pictures are not to scale.

Rx Drug Abuse   Common and Dangerous
WebMD Home  next page Mental Health Center next page Substance Abuse and Addiction Health Center next page Alcohol Abuse Feature Stories Email a Friend Print Article
Substance Abuse and Addiction Health Center
Tools & Resources
What It's Like to Have ADHDRecognize Withdrawal Symptoms
Tips to Avoid a HangoverDrug & Alcohol Treatments
Street Drugs   Know the FactsCrystal Meth 101
Share this
Listen
Rx Drug Abuse   Common and Dangerous
What are the most abused prescription drugs, and what are the risks?
By Katherine Kam
WebMD Feature Reviewed by Louise Chang, MD
WebMD Feature Archive
In the 1970s, parents worried that their longhaired, bell-bottomed teenagers were getting drunk or smoking marijuana. Today, dangers also come in the form of prescription medicines -- from opioid pain relievers such as OxyContin to ADHD drugs such as Ritalin.
