The Affordable Care Act gradually phases out the coverage gap by requiring drug makers to give enrollees discounts. This year, the discount is 50 percent of the cost of the drug. Even though enrollees are not paying that discounted amount out of their own pockets, the ACA allowed the dollar value to count toward the $4,850 threshold for catastrophic coverage to begin. Since the ACA took effect, the number of Medicare Part D enrollees who reach the catastrophic coverage level has grown from 400000 in 2010 to 700 by 2013, according to MedPAC. That costs Medicare and taxpayers more because the program pays 80 percent of the costs for drugs after enrollees go through the coverage gap.
Under the commission's proposal, enrollees would no longer be allowed to count those drug maker discounts toward the total, meaning it would take longer to hit the out-of-pocket cap. Indeed, about half of enrollees might not reach the threshold in a given year and not benefit from the 100 percent coverage, notes the report.
"For many people, this will actually increase spending," said Caroline Pearson of consulting firm Avalere in Washington, D.C., which is in the process of analyzing the financial impacts of the MedPAC proposals. "While our results aren't finalized yet, our generalized finding is that a small number of beneficiaries would save a lot of money … but a lot would spend more."
A new Medicare proposal would create drug price controls that do more harm than good for .
Other elements of the proposal would affect insurers. MedPAC recommends insurers shoulder more of the cost of prescriptions after enrollees exit the doughnut hole. That would encourage insurers to try to keep enrollees from hitting the coverage gap's upper limit by getting them to choose lower-cost drugs or by driving harder bargains with drug makers, said Mark Miller, executive director of the commission.
"A good portion of that payment is because beneficiaries are either using more expensive drugs or the prices of their drugs are going up relatively aggressively," said Miller. "We're trying to say … you're going to want to negotiate as tough prices as you can."
MedPAC says the proposals are needed because rising drug prices and other factors helped drive spending in the program to $73 billion in 2014 – and more high-cost drugs will hit the market soon. Without action, the rising costs could drive up program costs and probably premiums for enrollees, MedPAC said.
When MedPAC adopted its recommendations unanimously this spring, they drew mixed reviews and many comments from the drug industry, consumer groups and insurers. All groups found elements they liked in the plans and parts they opposed.

Who Could Be at Risk?
It's hard to know how many people in the U.S. are hooked on prescription drugs. That’s because only overdoses can be easily tracked. But based on those numbers, experts think that more than 8 and half million Americans abuse such meds. And they often start young. About 8% of high-school seniors said they used the painkiller hydrocodone for nonmedical reasons during the past year.

There’s no way to know who will become addicted. Some people use prescription pain pills -- and even misuse them for a short time -- but don’t become hooked.


Close-up of a young man bottlePhenobarbital, Mebaral, Seconal and NembutalValium and XanaxAmbien, Sonata and LunestaCodeine, Oramorph, Morphine Sulfate and AvinzaOxyContin, Percocet and PercodanVicodin, Lortab and LorcetDexedrine and AdderallRitalin and ConcertaRobitussin DMPseudoephedrine blister packageWoman in lab coat , close-up of handMother talking to adolescent daughter
Loading Next Slideshow
Could You Be Hooked? Surprising Addictions